SORA v0.3.3 (2026/Jul/03)
=========================

New Features
------------

sora.observer
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Migrated MPC observatory code lookup to the LIneA TAP service and added
  in-memory caching for repeated observer-code queries. [:pr:`115`]

sora.prediction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Added support for Gaia DR3 catalogue searches through LIneA TAP in
  `prediction()`, with automatic fallback to VizieR Gaia DR3 when the TAP
  query times out. [:pr:`115`]

sora.star
^^^^^^^^^

- Added the `LineaGaiaCatalogue` class and the `gaiadr3_linea` catalogue
  definition to query Gaia DR3 through LIneA TAP. [:pr:`115`]

- Added ADQL-compatible Gaia DR3 TAP queries, catalogue service descriptions,
  simple-column helpers, and Gaia metadata for correlations, RUWE, and
  duplicated-source flags. [:pr:`115`]

- `spatial_motion()` now supports vectorized star position propagation for one
  star at many epochs or many stars at one shared epoch. [:pr:`116`]

API Changes
-----------

General
^^^^^^^

- SORA now supports Python >=3.11 instead of requiring Python >=3.12.

- Added `jplephem` as an explicit dependency for barycentric vector
  calculations.

sora.observer
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- `search_code_mpc()` now receives one MPC code and returns the matching
  `(name, site)` tuple instead of downloading the complete observatory-code
  dictionary. [:pr:`115`]

- `Observer.name` is explicitly immutable after instantiation and assigning to
  it now raises `AttributeError`. [:pr:`115`]

sora.occultation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- The default chord projection method in `Chord` and `ChordList` is now
  `observer`, matching the observer-centered f/g calculation. [:pr:`116`]

sora.prediction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- The default `catalogue` in `prediction()` changed to `gaiadr3_linea`.
  [:pr:`115`]

sora.star
^^^^^^^^^

- The default `catalogue` in `Star` changed to `gaiadr3_linea`. [:pr:`115`]

Bug Fixes
---------

sora.body
^^^^^^^^^

- Replaced deprecated `pkg_resources` usage when accessing package resources.
  [:pr:`116`]

sora.ephem
^^^^^^^^^^

- Fixed Horizons ephemeris queries when using a `Spacecraft` as observer.
  [:issue:`102`]

sora.lightcurve
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Fixed `occdetect` BLS statistics handling for Python 3.13. [:issue:`113`]

sora.observer
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Fixed barycentric observer vectors by using Astropy barycentric Earth
  coordinates for Horizons-based observer positions.

- Fixed an Astropy `FutureWarning` raised when setting the location directly on
  a `Time` object.

- Reduced repeated observer-database requests by caching MPC code lookups.

sora.occultation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Validated scalar occultation position times before computing projected
  positions.

- Optimized `Chord` and `ChordList` f/g calculations by batching position
  requests for paths, exposure segments, and limb points.

sora.prediction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Fixed occultation map plotting when site coordinates are provided as
  geographic coordinates.

- Fixed the `plot_occ_map()` documentation for the `nscale` parameter.
  [:issue:`112`]

Documentation
-------------

- Added a bibliography of papers that cited SORA.

- Updated module docstrings across the package.

- Updated the observer guideline for immutable `Observer.name` behavior.

- Updated the body guideline to document the required external download of the
  PHOEBE 3D shape file and replaced the example Chariklo kernel to match the
  updated SBDB SPK ID.

- Updated ReadTheDocs requirements to Sphinx 8 and added
  `sphinxcontrib.bibtex`.
